The old weapons master is the most patient of us all. He sits in his corner day by day, watching as the shadows grow short, and then grow long once more. He does not move until he wants to, and only does so with purpose. We all listen to him, even if we do not know why. Day by day, I have come to watch him as well, and I know that he sees me. Every so often, I will watch from a little bit closer. I hope to see what he sees from his corner of the square. Instead, I am confused. I see less of the world, and more of him. I see into his eyes. They say he has seen the most of all of us. I do not doubt it.
I come closer, day by day. He notices me, and for the first time. he speaks to me. I do not hear him, but I know what he wants. So I come closer still, until I can see the polished dirt that makes his plating, the dirt within the folds of his garbs. He appears even more aged from close. It is hard to tell the age of ironfolk - we die as we live, of the ground beneath us. As we age, we grow slow, becoming of the earth, returning to that which had borne us in the first place. But he was different. There was a swiftness about him, even sitting stiller than stone, a rock among rocks. He wants to know me - not as he has known me, but as I know myself. I do not hear him speak, but I sense him through the air between us. So I tell him. I tell him of my and my eight brothers, warriors of the village, protecting that which we have grown in the world around us. Of my mother and father, and the stories they tell me of the day I came out of the loam drum of my birth. I tell him of my journey within the Mud-Realm, where we venture once a year, on the darkest of dark nights, to become more than we are now. I tell him of the shadows that haunt my little den, farthest from the lights that mark our house. But I hesitate to tell him of how the shadows that call to me, how I listened to their call and told them of what they wished to know - of me, of the wish I had that I was more. I hesitate to tell him of how the ground does not speak to me as it spake to my family, of how the loam fights within my soul, as if trying to take the place of something else from within me. I do not tell him of the blood that covers my hands as my skin sheds, giving way to little whispers in the wind that leave me in the night, and disappear by the morning. But I think he knows. He knows too much to not know. 
He looks at me as I talk, and when I finish, I feel him think. Not through our greatest Mother of Mothers, as my brothers speak, but through the air above it. Perhaps the weapons master is more than he seems - more than just the loam that makes up his flesh. The day goes on, but we sit there, growing ever more silent, ever more thoughtful. Ever more still. Finally, he closes his eyes, and his chest loosens. I do not know if I have ever seen another one of use take in a breath as he does. We do not need it. The weapons master looks back down to me. He knows that which I am, and he knows that which I am not. But he will not tell. He says it is for me to find out, and for me alone. He says he knows where the answers lie, but he is apprehensive. They lie beyond the rich black earthen sod of the Mud-Realm, past the home of the ironfolk. To find myself, I must leave that which I know. A dangerous path he says, but to stay is more dangerous still. He reaches within the folds of his armor and pulls out a stone, a little round orb of the blackest of blacks. It has never seen the air before. It feels ancient as he hands it to me, and is colder than fresh steel. I can feel it move inside itself, but it is light, as if not made of the same earth that our Mother of Mothers is made of. Crush it, he says, and I will come.
He gets up. I do not think I have ever seen him get up from his place. The ground around him has taken his shape, as if he is slowly becoming one with the ground without returning to the Mud-Realm. As if he is dying as he lives. He is not the same as the rest of us. He leads me to the edge of the village. I know where I must go. As I set out, I look back. I see my house, with the dark room where I once rested, the swirl of our family upon its doorstep. I see the village square where I played with my family, with all my brothers. I see the place where the weapons master sits as he watches the rest of us go by, ageing as he does not. And I see him sit back down in his place, and see his shoulders droop. He does not look so magnificent now. He looks like just another ironfolk, weary with carrying the weight of worlds. I turn forward now, to where I must go. I look small among the great stones that protect our home - their home, now - but I know that I am more than this shell of stone. I am strong. I am cunning. I am fast. I am Maya.
And I am going to find out who I am.